Proceedings of the Fifth Law Workshop (LAW V), pages 1–10,
Portland, Oregon, 23-24 June 2011. c⃝2011 Association for Computational Linguistics

On the Development of the RST Spanish Treebank 

Iria da Cunha 
Juan-Manuel Torres-Moreno 
Gerardo Sierra 
Institute for Applied 
Linguistics (UPF), Spain 
Laboratoire Informatique 
d’Avignon (UAPV), France 
Instituto de Ingeniería (UNAM), 
Mexico 
Instituto de Ingeniería 
(UNAM), Mexico 
Instituto de Ingeniería (UNAM), 
Mexico 
gsierram@iingen.unam.
mx 
Laboratoire Informatique 
d’Avignon (UAPV), France 
École Polytechnique de Montréal, 
Canada 
 

iria.dacunha@upf.edu juan-manuel.torres@univ-
avignon.fr 
 

 
 

Abstract 

In this article we present the RST Spanish 
Treebank, the first corpus annotated with 
rhetorical relations for this language. We 
describe the characteristics of the corpus, 
the annotation criteria, the annotation 
procedure, the inter-annotator agreement, 
and other related aspects. Moreover, we 
show the interface that we have developed 
to carry out searches over the corpus’ 
annotated texts. 

1 
Introduction 

The Rhetorical Structure Theory (RST) (Mann and 
Thompson, 1988) is a language independent theory 
based on the idea that a text can be segmented into 
Elementary Discourse Units (EDUs) linked by 
means 
of 
nucleus-satellite 
or 
multinuclear 
rhetorical relations. In the first case, the satellite 
gives additional information about the other one, 
the nucleus, on which it depends (ex. Result, 
Condition, Elaboration or Concession). In the 
second case, several elements, all nuclei, are 
connected at the same level, that is, there are no 
elements dependent on others and they all have the 
same importance with regard to the intentions of 
the author of the text (ex. Contrast, List, Joint or 
Sequence). The rhetorical analysis of a text by 
means of RST includes 3 phases: segmentation, 
detection of relations and building of hierarchical 
rhetorical trees. For more information about RST 
we recommend the original article of Mann and 

Thompson (1988), the web site of RST1 and the 
RST review by Taboada and Mann (2006a). 
RST has been used to develop several 
applications, 
like 
automatic 
summarization, 
information extraction (IE), text generation, 
question-answering, automatic translation, etc. 
(Taboada and Mann, 2006b). Nevertheless, most of 
these works have been developed for English, 
German or Portuguese. This is due to the fact that 
at present corpora annotated with RST relations are 
available only for these languages (for English: 
Carlson et al., 2002, Taboada and Renkema, 2008; 
for German: Stede, 2004; for Portuguese: Pardo et 
al., 2008) and there are automatic RST parsers for 
two of them (for English: Marcu, 2000; for 
Portuguese: Pardo et al., 2008) or automatic RST 
segmenters (for English: Tofiloski et al., 2009). 
Scientific community working on RST applied to 
Spanish is very small. For example, Bouayad-Agha 
et al. (2006) apply RST to text generation in 
several languages, Spanish among them. Da Cunha 
et al. (2007) develop a summarization system for 
medical texts in Spanish based on RST. Da Cunha 
and Iruskieta (2010) perform a contrastive analysis 
of Spanish and Basque texts. Romera (2004) 
analyzes coherence relations by means of RST in 
spoken Spanish. Taboada (2004) applies RST to 
analyze the resources used by speakers to elaborate 
conversations in English and Spanish.  
We consider that it is necessary to build a 
Spanish corpus annotated by means of RST. This 
corpus should be useful for the development of a 
rhetorical parser for this language and several other 
applications related to computational linguistics, 
like 
those 
developed 
for 
other 
languages 

                                                           
1 http://www.sfu.ca/rst/index.html 

1

PDF File: Iria_Juan-Manuel_Gerardo.pdf
Title:  On the Development of the RST Spanish Treebank
Authors: pages 1–10, Portland, Oregon, 23-24 June 2011. c⃝2011 Association for Computational Linguistics  On the Development of the RST Spanish Treebank   Iria da Cunha  Juan-Manuel Torres-Moreno  Gerardo Sierra  Institute for Applied  Linguistics (UPF), Spain  Laboratoire Informatique  d’Avignon (UAPV), France  Instituto de Ingeniería (UNAM),  Mexico  Instituto de Ingeniería  (UNAM), Mexico  Instituto de Ingeniería (UNAM),  Mexico  gsierram@iingen.unam. mx  Laboratoire Informatique  d’Avignon (UAPV), France  École Polytechnique de Montréal,  Canada     iria.dacunha@upf.edu juan-manuel.torres@univavignon.fr          Abstract   In this article we present the RST Spanish  Treebank, the first corpus annotated with  rhetorical relations for this language. We  describe the characteristics of the corpus,  the annotation criteria, the annotation  procedure, the inter-annotator agreement,  and other related aspects. Moreover, we  show the interface that we have developed  to carry out searches over the corpus’  annotated texts.   1  Introduction   The Rhetorical Structure Theory (RST) (Mann and  Thompson, 1988) is a language independent theory  based on the idea that a text can be segmented into  Elementary Discourse Units (EDUs) linked by  means  of  nucleus-satellite  or  multinuclear  rhetorical relations. In the first case, the satellite  gives additional information about the other one,  the nucleus, on which it depends (ex. Result,  Condition, Elaboration or Concession). In the  second case, several elements, all nuclei, are  connected at the same level, that is, there are no  elements dependent on others and they all have the  same importance with regard to the intentions of  the author of the text (ex. Contrast, List, Joint or  Sequence). The rhetorical analysis of a text by  means of RST includes 3 phases: segmentation,  detection of relations and building of hierarchical  rhetorical trees. For more information about RST  we recommend the original article of Mann and   Thompson (1988), the web site of RST1 and the  RST review by Taboada and Mann (2006a).  RST has been used to develop several  applications,  like  automatic  summarization,  information extraction (IE), text generation,  question-answering, automatic translation, etc.  (Taboada and Mann, 2006b). Nevertheless, most of  these works have been developed for English,  German or Portuguese. This is due to the fact that  at present corpora annotated with RST relations are  available only for these languages (for English:  Carlson et al., 2002, Taboada and Renkema, 2008;  for German: Stede, 2004; for Portuguese: Pardo et  al., 2008) and there are automatic RST parsers for  two of them (for English: Marcu, 2000; for  Portuguese: Pardo et al., 2008) or automatic RST  segmenters (for English: Tofiloski et al., 2009).  Scientific community working on RST applied to  Spanish is very small. For example, Bouayad-Agha  et al. (2006) apply RST to text generation in  several languages, Spanish among them. Da Cunha  et al. (2007) develop a summarization system for  medical texts in Spanish based on RST. Da Cunha  and Iruskieta (2010) perform a contrastive analysis  of Spanish and Basque texts. Romera (2004)  analyzes coherence relations by means of RST in  spoken Spanish. Taboada (2004) applies RST to  analyze the resources used by speakers to elaborate  conversations in English and Spanish.   We consider that it is necessary to build a  Spanish corpus annotated by means of RST. This  corpus should be useful for the development of a  rhetorical parser for this language and several other  applications related to computational linguistics,  like  those  developed  for  other  languages                                                               1 http://www.sfu.ca/rst/index.html   1
Abstract: In this article we present the RST Spanish  Treebank, the first corpus annotated with  rhetorical relations for this language. We  describe the characteristics of the corpus,  the annotation criteria, the annotation  procedure, the inter-annotator agreement,  and other related aspects. Moreover, we  show the interface that we have developed  to carry out searches over the corpus’  annotated texts.
