A word embedding approach to explore a collection
of discussions of people in psychological distress

1st R´emy Kessler
Universit´e Bretagne Sud
CNRS 6074A
56017 Vannes,France
remy.kessler@univ-ubs.fr

2nd Nicolas B´echet
Universit´e Bretagne Sud
CNRS 6074A
56017 Vannes,France
nicolas.bechet@irisa.fr

3rd Gudrun Ledegen
Universit´e Rennes II
PREFics, EA 4246
5043 Rennes, France
gudrun.ledegen@univ-rennes2.fr

4rd Frederic Pugni`ere-Saavedra
Universit´e Bretagne Sud
PREFics, EA 4246
56017 Vannes, France
frederic.pugniere-saavedra@univ-ubs.fr

Abstract—In order to better adapt to society, an association
has developed a web chat application that allows anyone to
express and share their concerns and anguishes. Several thousand
anonymous conversations have been gathered and form a new
corpus of stories about human distress and social violence. We
present a method of corpus analysis combining unsupervised
learning and word embedding in order to bring out the themes
of this particular collection. We compare this approach with a
standard algorithm of the literature on a labeled corpus and
obtain very good results. An interpretation of the obtained
clusters collection conﬁrms the interest of the method.
Keywords—word2vec, unsupervised learning, word embedding.

I. INTRODUCTION

Since the nineties, social suffering has been a theme that has
received much attention from public and associative action.
Among the consequences, there is an explosion of listening
places or socio-technical devices of communication whose
objectives consist in moderating the various forms of suffering
by the liberation of the speech for a therapeutic purpose [1]
[2]. As part of the METICS project, a suicide prevention
association developed an application of web chat to meet
this need. The web chat is an area that allows anyone to
express and share with a volunteer listener their concerns and
anguishes. The main speciﬁcity of this device is its anonymous
nature. Protected by a pseudonym, the writers are invited
to discuss with a volunteer the problematic aspects of their
existence. Several thousand anonymous conversations have
been gathered and form a corpus of unpublished stories about
human distress. The purpose of the METICS project is to make
visible the ordinary forms of suffering usually removed from
common spaces and to grasp both its modes of enunciation and
digital support. In this study, we want to automatically identify
the reason for coming on the web chat for each participant.
Indeed, even if the association provided us with the theme
of all the conversations (work, loneliness, violence, racism,
addictions, family, etc.), the original reason has not been
preserved. In what follows, we ﬁrst review some of the related

work in Section II. Section III presents the resources used and
gives some statistics about the collection. An overview of the
system and the strategy for identify the reason for coming
on the web chat is given in Section IV. Section V presents
the experimental protocol, an evaluation of our system and an
interpretation of the ﬁnal results on the collection of human
distress.

II. RELATED WORKS

The main characteristic of the approach presented in this
paper is to only have to provide the labels of the classes to
be predicted. This method does not need to have a tagged
data set to predict the different classes, so it is closer to an
unsupervised (clustering) or semi-supervised learning method
than a supervised. The main idea of clustering is to group
untagged data into a number of clusters, such that similar ex-
amples are grouped together and different ones are separated.
In clustering, the number of classes and the distribution of
instances between classes are unknown and the goal is to ﬁnd
meaningful clusters.
One kind of clustering methods is the partitioning-based
one. The k-means algorithm [3] is one of the most popu-
lar partitioning-based algorithms because it provides a good
compromise between the quality of the solution obtained and
its computational complexity [4]. K-means aims to ﬁnd k
centroids, one for each cluster, minimizing the sum of the
distances of each instance of data from its respective centroid.
We can cite other partitioning-based algorithms such as k-
medoids or PAM (Partition Around Medoids), which is an
evolution of k-means [5]. Hierarchical approaches produce
clusters by recursively partitioning data backwards or upwards.
For example, in a hierarchical ascending classiﬁcation or
CAH [6], each example from the initial dataset represents a
cluster. Then, the clusters are merged, according to a similarity
measure, until the desired tree structure is obtained. The result
of this clustering method is called a dendrogram. Density-
based methods like the EM algorithm [7] assume that the data
belonging to each cluster is derived from a speciﬁc probability

PDF File: kesslerMETICS-ICDIM2019.pdf
Title: A word embedding approach to explore a collectionof discussions of people in psychological distress
Authors: ss  1st R´emy Kessler Universit´e Bretagne Sud CNRS 6074A 56017 Vannes,France remy.kessler@univ-ubs.fr  2nd Nicolas B´echet Universit´e Bretagne Sud CNRS 6074A 56017 Vannes,France nicolas.bechet@irisa.fr  3rd Gudrun Ledegen Universit´e Rennes II PREFics, EA 4246 5043 Rennes, France gudrun.ledegen@univ-rennes2.fr  4rd Frederic Pugni`ere-Saavedra Universit´e Bretagne Sud PREFics, EA 4246 56017 Vannes, France frederic.pugniere-saavedra@univ-ubs.fr  Abstract—In order to better adapt to society, an association has developed a web chat application that allows anyone to express and share their concerns and anguishes. Several thousand anonymous conversations have been gathered and form a new corpus of stories about human distress and social violence. We present a method of corpus analysis combining unsupervised learning and word embedding in order to bring out the themes of this particular collection. We compare this approach with a standard algorithm of the literature on a labeled corpus and obtain very good results. An interpretation of the obtained clusters collection conﬁrms the interest of the method. Keywords—word2vec, unsupervised learning, word embedding.  I. INTRODUCTION  Since the nineties, social suffering has been a theme that has received much attention from public and associative action. Among the consequences, there is an explosion of listening places or socio-technical devices of communication whose objectives consist in moderating the various forms of suffering by the liberation of the speech for a therapeutic purpose [1] [2]. As part of the METICS project, a suicide prevention association developed an application of web chat to meet this need. The web chat is an area that allows anyone to express and share with a volunteer listener their concerns and anguishes. The main speciﬁcity of this device is its anonymous nature. Protected by a pseudonym, the writers are invited to discuss with a volunteer the problematic aspects of their existence. Several thousand anonymous conversations have been gathered and form a corpus of unpublished stories about human distress. The purpose of the METICS project is to make visible the ordinary forms of suffering usually removed from common spaces and to grasp both its modes of enunciation and digital support. In this study, we want to automatically identify the reason for coming on the web chat for each participant. Indeed, even if the association provided us with the theme of all the conversations (work, loneliness, violence, racism, addictions, family, etc.), the original reason has not been preserved. In what follows, we ﬁrst review some of the related  work in Section II. Section III presents the resources used and gives some statistics about the collection. An overview of the system and the strategy for identify the reason for coming on the web chat is given in Section IV. Section V presents the experimental protocol, an evaluation of our system and an interpretation of the ﬁnal results on the collection of human distress.  II. RELATED WORKS  The main characteristic of the approach presented in this paper is to only have to provide the labels of the classes to be predicted. This method does not need to have a tagged data set to predict the different classes, so it is closer to an unsupervised (clustering) or semi-supervised learning method than a supervised. The main idea of clustering is to group untagged data into a number of clusters, such that similar examples are grouped together and different ones are separated. In clustering, the number of classes and the distribution of instances between classes are unknown and the goal is to ﬁnd meaningful clusters. One kind of clustering methods is the partitioning-based one. The k-means algorithm [3] is one of the most popular partitioning-based algorithms because it provides a good compromise between the quality of the solution obtained and its computational complexity [4]. K-means aims to ﬁnd k centroids, one for each cluster, minimizing the sum of the distances of each instance of data from its respective centroid. We can cite other partitioning-based algorithms such as kmedoids or PAM (Partition Around Medoids), which is an evolution of k-means [5]. Hierarchical approaches produce clusters by recursively partitioning data backwards or upwards. For example, in a hierarchical ascending classiﬁcation or CAH [6], each example from the initial dataset represents a cluster. Then, the clusters are merged, according to a similarity measure, until the desired tree structure is obtained. The result of this clustering method is called a dendrogram. Densitybased methods like the EM algorithm [7] assume that the data belonging to each cluster is derived from a speciﬁc probability
Abstract: —In order to better adapt to society, an association has developed a web chat application that allows anyone to express and share their concerns and anguishes. Several thousand anonymous conversations have been gathered and form a new corpus of stories about human distress and social violence. We present a method of corpus analysis combining unsupervised learning and word embedding in order to bring out the themes of this particular collection. We compare this approach with a standard algorithm of the literature on a labeled corpus and obtain very good results. An interpretation of the obtained clusters collection conﬁrms the interest of the method. Keywords—word2vec, unsupervised learning, word embedding.
