c⃝ 2002 Association for Computational Linguistics

Periods, Capitalized Words, etc.

Andrei Mikheev∗

University of Edinburgh

In this article we present an approach for tackling three important aspects of text normaliza-
tion: sentence boundary disambiguation, disambiguation of capitalized words in positions where
capitalization is expected, and identiﬁcation of abbreviations. As opposed to the two dominant
techniques of computing statistics or writing specialized grammars, our document-centered ap-
proach works by considering suggestive local contexts and repetitions of individual words within
a document. This approach proved to be robust to domain shifts and new lexica and produced per-
formance on the level with the highest reported results. When incorporated into a part-of-speech
tagger, it helped reduce the error rate signiﬁcantly on capitalized words and sentence boundaries.
We also investigated the portability to other languages and obtained encouraging results.

1. Introduction

Disambiguation of sentence boundaries and normalization of capitalized words, as
well as identiﬁcation of abbreviations, however small in comparison to other tasks
of text processing, are of primary importance in the developing of practical text-
processing applications. These tasks are usually performed before actual “intelligent”
text processing starts, and errors made at this stage are very likely to cause more errors
at later stages and are therefore very dangerous.
Disambiguation of capitalized words in mixed-case texts has received little atten-
tion in the natural language processing and information retrieval communities, but in
fact it plays an important role in many tasks. In mixed-case texts capitalized words
usually denote proper names (names of organizations, locations, people, artifacts, etc.),
but there are special positions in the text where capitalization is expected. Such manda-
tory positions include the ﬁrst word in a sentence, words in titles with all signiﬁcant
words capitalized or table entries, a capitalized word after a colon or open quote, and
the ﬁrst word in a list entry, among others. Capitalized words in these and some other
positions present a case of ambiguity: they can stand for proper names, as in White
later said . . . , or they can be just capitalized common words, as in White elephants are
. . . . The disambiguation of capitalized words in ambiguous positions leads to the
identiﬁcation of proper names (or their derivatives), and in this article we will use
these two terms and the term case normalization interchangeably.
Church (1995, p. 294) studied, among other simple text normalization techniques,
the effect of case normalization for different words and showed that “sometimes case
variants refer to the same thing (hurricane and Hurricane), sometimes they refer to
different things (continental and Continental) and sometimes they don’t refer to much
of anything (e.g., anytime and Anytime).” Obviously these differences arise because
some capitalized words stand for proper names (such as Continental, the name of an
airline) and some do not.

∗ Institute for Communicating and Collaborative Systems, Division of Informatics, 2 Buccleuch Place,
Edinburgh EH8 9LW, UK. E-mail: mikheev@cogsci.ed.ac.uk

PDF File: mikheev J02-3002.pdf
Title:  Periods, Capitalized Words, etc.
Authors: ional Linguistics  Periods, Capitalized Words, etc.  Andrei Mikheev∗  University of Edinburgh  In this article we present an approach for tackling three important aspects of text normalization: sentence boundary disambiguation, disambiguation of capitalized words in positions where capitalization is expected, and identiﬁcation of abbreviations. As opposed to the two dominant techniques of computing statistics or writing specialized grammars, our document-centered approach works by considering suggestive local contexts and repetitions of individual words within a document. This approach proved to be robust to domain shifts and new lexica and produced performance on the level with the highest reported results. When incorporated into a part-of-speech tagger, it helped reduce the error rate signiﬁcantly on capitalized words and sentence boundaries. We also investigated the portability to other languages and obtained encouraging results.  1. Introduction  Disambiguation of sentence boundaries and normalization of capitalized words, as well as identiﬁcation of abbreviations, however small in comparison to other tasks of text processing, are of primary importance in the developing of practical textprocessing applications. These tasks are usually performed before actual “intelligent” text processing starts, and errors made at this stage are very likely to cause more errors at later stages and are therefore very dangerous. Disambiguation of capitalized words in mixed-case texts has received little attention in the natural language processing and information retrieval communities, but in fact it plays an important role in many tasks. In mixed-case texts capitalized words usually denote proper names (names of organizations, locations, people, artifacts, etc.), but there are special positions in the text where capitalization is expected. Such mandatory positions include the ﬁrst word in a sentence, words in titles with all signiﬁcant words capitalized or table entries, a capitalized word after a colon or open quote, and the ﬁrst word in a list entry, among others. Capitalized words in these and some other positions present a case of ambiguity: they can stand for proper names, as in White later said . . . , or they can be just capitalized common words, as in White elephants are . . . . The disambiguation of capitalized words in ambiguous positions leads to the identiﬁcation of proper names (or their derivatives), and in this article we will use these two terms and the term case normalization interchangeably. Church (1995, p. 294) studied, among other simple text normalization techniques, the effect of case normalization for different words and showed that “sometimes case variants refer to the same thing (hurricane and Hurricane), sometimes they refer to different things (continental and Continental) and sometimes they don’t refer to much of anything (e.g., anytime and Anytime).” Obviously these differences arise because some capitalized words stand for proper names (such as Continental, the name of an airline) and some do not.  ∗ Institute for Communicating and Collaborative Systems, Division of Informatics, 2 Buccleuch Place, Edinburgh EH8 9LW, UK. E-mail: mikheev@cogsci.ed.ac.uk
Abstract: In this article we present an approach for tackling three important aspects of text normalization: sentence boundary disambiguation, disambiguation of capitalized words in positions where capitalization is expected, and identiﬁcation of abbreviations. As opposed to the two dominant techniques of computing statistics or writing specialized grammars, our document-centered approach works by considering suggestive local contexts and repetitions of individual words within a document. This approach proved to be robust to domain shifts and new lexica and produced performance on the level with the highest reported results. When incorporated into a part-of-speech tagger, it helped reduce the error rate signiﬁcantly on capitalized words and sentence boundaries. We also investigated the portability to other languages and obtained encouraging results.   .
