Proceedings of the ACL-HLT 2011 System Demonstrations, pages 86–91,
Portland, Oregon, USA, 21 June 2011. c⃝2011 Association for Computational Linguistics
MACAON
An NLP Tool Suite for Processing Word Lattices
Alexis Nasr
Fr´ed´eric B´echet
Jean-Franc¸ois Rey
Benoˆıt Favre
Joseph Le Roux∗
Laboratoire d’Informatique Fondamentale de Marseille- CNRS - UMR 6166
Universit´e Aix-Marseille
(alexis.nasr,frederic.bechet,jean-francois.rey,benoit.favre,joseph.le.roux)
@lif.univ-mrs.fr
Abstract
MACAON is a tool suite for standard NLP tasks
developed for French. MACAON has been de-
signed to process both human-produced text
and highly ambiguous word-lattices produced
by NLP tools. MACAON is made of several na-
tive modules for common tasks such as a tok-
enization, a part-of-speech tagging or syntac-
tic parsing, all communicating with each other
through XML ﬁles . In addition, exchange pro-
tocols with external tools are easily deﬁnable.
MACAON is a fast, modular and open tool, dis-
tributed under GNU Public License.
1
Introduction
The automatic processing of textual data generated
by NLP software, resulting from Machine Transla-
tion, Automatic Speech Recognition or Automatic
Text Summarization, raises new challenges for lan-
guage processing tools. Unlike native texts (texts
produced by humans), this new kind of texts is the
result of imperfect processors and they are made
of several hypotheses, usually weighted with con-
ﬁdence measures. Automatic text production sys-
tems can produce these weighted hypotheses as n-
best lists, word lattices, or confusion networks. It is
crucial for this space of ambiguous solutions to be
kept for later processing since the ambiguities of the
lower levels can sometimes be resolved during high-
level processing stages. It is therefore important to
be able to represent this ambiguity.
∗This work has been funded by the French Agence Nationale
pour la Recherche, through the projects SEQUOIA (ANR-08-
EMER-013) and DECODA (2009-CORD-005-01)
MACAON is a suite of tools developped to pro-
cess ambiguous input and extend inference of in-
put modules within a global scope.
It con-
sists in several modules that perform classical
NLP tasks (tokenization, word recognition, part-of-
speech tagging, lemmatization, morphological anal-
ysis, partial or full parsing) on either native text
or word lattices.
MACAON is distributed under
GNU public licence and can be downloaded from
http://www.macaon.lif.univ-mrs.fr/.
From a general point of view, a MACAON module
can be seen as an annotation device1 which adds a
new level of annotation to its input that generally de-
pends on annotations from preceding modules. The
modules communicate through XML ﬁles that allow
the representation different layers of annotation as
well as ambiguities at each layer. Moreover, the ini-
tial XML structuring of the processed ﬁles (logical
structuring of a document, information from the Au-
tomatic Speech Recognition module ...) remains
untouched by the processing stages.
As already mentioned, one of the main charac-
teristics of MACAON is the ability for each module
to accept ambiguous inputs and produce ambiguous
outputs, in such a way that ambiguities can be re-
solved at a later stage of processing. The compact
representation of ambiguous structures is at the heart
of the MACAON exchange format, described in sec-
tion 2. Furthermore every module can weight the
solutions it produces. such weights can be used to
rank solutions or limit their number for later stages
1Annotation must be taken here in a general sense which in-
cludes tagging, segmentation or the construction of more com-
plex objets as syntagmatic or dependencies trees.
86
