Magazine ()f Concrete Research: November 1957A method for the calculation of the specific gravities of calcium silicates from their  refractive indices*by J. W. Howison, B.Sc. and H. F. W. Taylor, B.Sc., Ph.D.Contribution by J. D. C. McConnell, B.Sc., M.A.  (University of Cambridge)  Howison and Taylor have demonstrated the possible  existence of interstices in the plombierite gel samples  studied by me. Recent work which I have done shows  that a very fine scale pore system does indeed exist. The  pore structure has been studied by small angle scattering  technique and by the analysis of absorption curves for  the gel. The pores appear to be lamellar~f the order of  several hundred Angstrom units in lateral extent and·Pages 13-16with a width comparable to individual hydrate sheets.  Explanation of the pore system involves a detailed  study of the possible mechanism of hydration of the  parent dicalcium silicate minerals and this, together with  an account of the microstructure of the natural gel,  plombierite, I propose to publish shortly.Reply by the authors  Dr McConnell's observations on natural plombierite  gel are of considerable interest as this material seems in  many ways to resemble that formed on hydration of  cement. His results apparently support and extend our  own and the full report of his work will be awaited with  interest.Unbroken tobermorite crystals from hydrated cement*by R. Gaze, B.Sc., Ph.D., A.R.l.e. and Robert H. Robertson, M.A., F.G.S.Contribution by A. E. Moore, M.Sc., A.lnst.P.(Cement and Concrete Association)  It would be interesting to know whether any diffraction  photographs were taken of the preparations described by  Dr Gaze and Mr Robertson. If not, the reservations  expressed by Dr Jeffery in his comments on the authors'  earlier paper") would still apply: namely, that these foils  cannot be identified as tobermorite on appearance alone.·Pages 25-26182REFERENCE  I.  GAZE, R. and ROBERTSON, R. H. s. Some observations  on calcium silicate hydrate (I)-tobermorite. Magazine of Concrete Research. Vol. 8, No. 22. pp. 7-12.  Discussion No. 24. pp. 168.Reply by the authors  No electron diffraction photographs were obtained  from these preparations. The electron diffraction patterns  from more recent preparations involving a hydrothermal  reaction of Portland cement and silica clearly identified  tobermorite in the form of plates and foils.Downloaded by [] on [13/09/16]. Copyright © ICE Publishing, all rights reserved.