Coling 2008: Companion volume – Posters and Demonstrations, pages 23–26
Manchester, August 2008
A Scalable MMR Approach to Sentence Scoring
for Multi-Document Update Summarization
Florian Boudin/naturaland Marc El-B `eze/natural
/naturalLaboratoire Informatique d’Avignon
339 chemin des Meinajaries, BP1228,
84911 Avignon Cedex 9, France.
florian.boudin@univ-avignon.fr
marc.elbeze@univ-avignon.frJuan-Manuel Torres-Moreno/natural,/flat
/flat´Ecole Polytechnique de Montr ´eal
CP 6079 Succ. Centre Ville H3C 3A7
Montr ´eal (Qu ´ebec), Canada.
juan-manuel.torres@univ-avignon.fr
Abstract
We present S MMR , a scalable sentence
scoring method for query-oriented up-
date summarization. Sentences are scored
thanks to a criterion combining query rele-
vance and dissimilarity with already read
documents (history). As the amount of
data in history increases, non-redundancy
is prioritized over query-relevance. We
show that S MMR achieves promising re-
sults on the DUC 2007 update corpus.
1 Introduction
Extensive experiments on query-oriented multi-
document summarization have been carried out
over the past few years. Most of the strategies
to produce summaries are based on an extrac-
tion method, which identiﬁes salient textual seg-
ments, most often sentences, in documents. Sen-
tences containing the most salient concepts are se-
lected, ordered and assembled according to their
relevance to produce summaries (also called ex-
tracts) (Mani and Maybury, 1999).
Recently emerged from the Document Under-
standing Conference (DUC) 20071, update sum-
marization attempts to enhance summarization
when more information about knowledge acquired
by the user is available. It asks the following ques-
tion: has the user already read documents on the
topic? In the case of a positive answer, producing
an extract focusing on only new facts is of inter-
est. In this way, an important issue is introduced:
c/circlecopyrt2008. Licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-Noncommercial-Share Alike 3.0 Unported li-
cense (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/3.0/).
Some rights reserved.
1Document Understanding Conferences are conducted
since 2000 by the National Institute of Standards and Tech-
nology (NIST), http://www-nlpir.nist.govredundancy with previously read documents (his-
tory) has to be removed from the extract.
A natural way to go about update summarization
would be extracting temporal tags (dates, elapsed
times, temporal expressions...) (Mani and Wilson,
2000) or to automatically construct the timeline
from documents (Swan and Allan, 2000). These
temporal marks could be used to focus extracts on
the most recently written facts. However, most re-
cently written facts are not necessarily new facts.
Machine Reading (MR) was used by (Hickl et
al., 2007) to construct knowledge representations
from clusters of documents. Sentences contain-
ing “new” information (i.e. that could not be in-
ferred by any previously considered document)
are selected to generate summary. However, this
highly efﬁcient approach (best system in DUC
2007 update) requires large linguistic resources.
(Witte et al., 2007) propose a rule-based system
based on fuzzy coreference cluster graphs. Again,
this approach requires to manually write the sen-
tence ranking scheme. Several strategies remain-
ing on post-processing redundancy removal tech-
niques have been suggested. Extracts constructed
from history were used by (Boudin and Torres-
Moreno, 2007) to minimize history’s redundancy.
(Lin et al., 2007) have proposed a modiﬁed Max-
imal Marginal Relevance (MMR) (Carbonell and
Goldstein, 1998) re-ranker during sentence selec-
tion, constructing the summary by incrementally
re-ranking sentences.
In this paper, we propose a scalable sentence
scoring method for update summarization derived
from MMR. Motivated by the need for relevant
novelty, candidate sentences are selected accord-
ing to a combined criterion of query relevance and
dissimilarity with previously read sentences. The
rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 223